Why is it challenging
to use our gift of speech wisely?
Because something powerful
constantly works against us.
What is it?
Imperfection.
The tongue is powerful.
It can do much good,
but because of imperfection,
it can also cause much harm.
This thought is well expressed
in the Bible book of Proverbs.
For example, Proverbs 12:18 says:
“Thoughtless speech
is like the stabs of a sword,
but the tongue of the wise is a healing.”
And Proverbs 18:21 states:
“Death and life
are in the power of the tongue;
those who love to use it
will eat its fruitage.”
Words have power,
so we need to be careful about what we say
and how we say it.
Perhaps you can recall
when someone spoke unkindly to you
and hurt you deeply.
On the other hand, thoughtful speech
can mend an aching heart
and heal friendships.
Because of imperfection,
we all have difficulty
controlling our tongue.
This was true
even of the first-century disciple James.
He humbly acknowledged the challenge
that all humans face
in the third chapter of his inspired letter.
Notice how James described this
at James 3:3-6, 8:
“If we put bridles in the mouths of horses
“to make them obey us,
“we guide also the whole body.
“Look also at ships: Although they are so big
“and are driven by strong winds,
“they are steered by a very small rudder
“wherever the man at the helm
is inclined to go.
“So, too, the tongue
is a small part of the body,
“and yet it makes great brags.
“See how small a fire it takes
“to set a great forest ablaze!
“The tongue is also a fire.
“The tongue represents a world
of unrighteousness
“among our body members,
for it defiles
“all the body
and sets the whole course of life on fire,
and it is set on fire by Gehenna.”
And verse 8:
“But no human can tame the tongue.
“It is unruly and injurious,
full of deadly poison.”
In addition to inherited imperfection,
our upbringing could also be a factor.
The Watchtower  of September 15, 2006,
page 21, paragraph 6 states:
“In addition to human imperfection,
“family environment plays a role
in the misuse of the tongue.
“Some people were raised in homes
“where parents were ‘not open
to any agreement, . . .
without self-control, fierce.’”
Despite such challenges,
it is possible for each one of us
to “seek peace and pursue it.”
Jesus set a good example
in using the gift of speech wisely.
He used his speech to encourage
and comfort others.
While on earth, he applied to himself
the words
found at Isaiah 61:1,
which states the following:
“The spirit of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah
is upon me,
“because Jehovah anointed me
to declare good news to the meek.
“He sent me to bind up the brokenhearted,
“to proclaim liberty to the captives
and the wide opening of the eyes
to the prisoners.”
As recorded at Matthew 12:20,
Matthew applies the words
of Isaiah 42:1-3 to Jesus.
At Matthew 12:20, he stated:
“No bruised reed will he crush,
“and no smoldering wick will he extinguish,
until he brings justice with success.”
We learn an important lesson
from such verses.
Jesus recognized that the tongue has power
—power to harm and power to heal.
The Watchtower  of February 15, 2015,
page 13, and paragraph 11, thus stated
that “Jesus showed discernment
in all he said and did.”
Can we imitate Jesus more closely?
If so, what will you do
the next time an opportunity arises
for you to use your gift of speech wisely?
In the following dramatization,
notice how the wise use of the tongue
helps to heal.
I just need a bit of help.
What do you think I should do
for my winter collection?
Well, I don’t know,
but I love what you did with your new stuff,
especially
this set.
Oh, thanks.
You’ve all given me so many great ideas.
Yeah, but you make them.
Yeah.
OK, girls.
You love it.
Oh, this is my song.
Mine too.
“You have a treasured place
“in Jehovah’s house;
“He’ll help you out [out].
And you have . . .”
Oh, I sing like a crow.
No, stop!
I’ll tell you who else thinks it’s her song,
but you’d better have earplugs handy
—Veronica.
Oh, my goodness!
She’s in love with her own voice.
Ever sit near her at the hall?
It’s like she’s the only one that can sing.
And she’s such a diva.
My first thought:
‘Oh, no! Here we go again!
I’ve seen this movie before.’
You don’t think she’s showing off?
Is this just about Haley?
It seems it’s all about Haley.
Is there just a little bit of envy in there?
I’ve lived it.
If it’s a case of her being more careful
how she comes across,
that’s another matter.
What did she suggest?
That I should tell her
that she needs to stop.
Can you believe that?
Especially as a pioneer,
what kind of example is she setting?
How quickly it snowballs out of control!
That’s not what I am saying at all.
You are such . . .
Wow! I can’t believe you.
Are you that lonely
that you’ve got nothing better to do?
Haley!
How difficult it can be to unravel!
I’m sorry.
I shouldn’t have judged you so harshly.
I shouldn’t have judged you at all.
A chance to forgive
is a chance to imitate Jehovah.
Think back to a time
when you wanted forgiveness.
Has anyone ever tried talking to her
about her singing?
You know what I love about Veronica?
She’s probably the most hospitable person
I know.
It’s always open house at her place.
And can she cook!
Have you tried her curry?
I haven’t tried it yet.
Yeah, it’s so good.
It’s so good.
I really look forward to that.
It’s really good.
OK, I’ll ask her.
She does these curry nights.
Oh, you’re going to love it.
We should use our gift of speech
to honor God and to benefit others.
And if somebody gets angry at us,
our mild reply can diffuse the situation.
As Proverbs 15:1 says:
“A mild answer turns away rage,
but a harsh word stirs up anger.”
We can also use our gift of speech
to console and encourage others.
First Thessalonians 5:11, 14 states:
“Therefore, keep encouraging one another
and building one another up,
“just as you are in fact doing. . . .
“On the other hand, we urge you, brothers,
“to warn the disorderly, speak consolingly
“to those who are depressed,
support the weak, be patient toward all.”
Yes, even faithful servants of Jehovah
may at times struggle with depression.
How can we help such ones?
Offer specific, genuine commendation
to help them see their own value
in Jehovah’s eyes.
Share with them the powerful words
of Bible texts
showing that Jehovah
truly cares about and loves those
who “are broken at heart”
and “crushed in spirit.”
We can also use the power of our tongue
to provide much needed encouragement
to others.
Has a fellow believer lost
a loved one in death?
Sympathetic words
expressing our care and concern
can comfort a grieving heart.
Is an elderly brother or sister
feeling unneeded?
A thoughtful tongue can reassure older ones
that they are valued and appreciated.
Is someone struggling with a chronic illness?
Kind words shared on the phone or in person
can do much to lift the spirits
of one who is sick.
How pleased our Creator must be
when we use the power of speech
to utter sayings
that are “good for building up”!
We may not be able to fix their problems,
but we can let them know that we love them
and we care about them.
For example, you can arrange
to spend time with him or her.
Additionally, we can use God’s Word
to strengthen them.
Or you may notice
that someone in the congregation
is discouraged or depressed.
You could read an encouraging Bible verse
and even offer to say a prayer.
Reassure such ones
that their brothers and sisters
in the congregation love them.
And speak in a way that shows
that you really mean and believe
what you say.
This symposium has given each one of us
much to think about, has it not?
We have been reminded
that seeking peace is not always easy.
We have also learned
that the pursuit of peace
requires effort.
In what specific ways are you resolved
to “seek peace and pursue it”
in the days ahead?
May we all continue to pursue peace
(1) by not quickly taking offense,
(2) by apologizing,
(3) by forgiving freely,
and (4) by using our gift of speech wisely
to encourage and comfort others.
And may Jehovah, “the God of peace,”
bless you abundantly for doing so!